docs: fundamentals section (#705)
software-mansion/react-native-enriched: docs/docs/fundamentals/core-concepts.md

# Core concepts

You've built an editor. Before going on, it's worth understanding the few
ideas the whole library is built on. They explain why the API looks the way it
does and help you understand further chapters better.

## The input is uncontrolled

`EnrichedTextInput` does not take its content from a prop and does not push
every keystroke back into React state. It owns its content on the native side

> and you talk to it through a `ref`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
every keystroke back into React state. It owns its content and state on the native side
and you talk to it through a `ref`.
```

This is deliberate. Rich text changes constantly - every character, selection
move and style toggle - and round-tripping all of that through JavaScript state
would be extremely slow and open to a possible de-synchronization of those states.

> Keeping it native makes the editor fast and stable.

Reviewer 2: Can we clearly mark that `those states` is about native and JS state desynchronization?

Reviewer: +1

In practice this means:

- To **change** the content or formatting, call a method on the ref, e.g. `ref.current?.toggleBold()`, `ref.current?.setValue(html)`, or `ref.current?.setLink(...)`.
- To **observe** changes to the content or formatting, listen to events such as `onChangeState`, `onChangeHtml`, or `onChangeSelection`.

> You never set a `value` prop and re-render to make an edit happen.

Reviewer 2: We have to add `defaultValue` explanation here

## HTML is the source of truth

The editor's content is HTML. `setValue` and `defaultValue` seeds it with an HTML string,
`getHTML` reads the current content back, and `onChangeHtml` streams it as it
changes. What you store and what you render is a string of HTML.

The library uses a fixed set of standard and custom tags, so the output is
predictable and portable. [Supported tags](/fundamentals/html-format-and-supported-tags)
lists exactly what it produces and accepts.

:::caution

Sanitizing HTML is your responsibility. The library doesn't guarantee safe HTML on mobile, so
sanitize anything you persist, render elsewhere, or accept from untrusted

> sources. To learn how sanitization is handled on Web, see [Web support](/core-functionalities/web-support)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sources. To learn how sanitization is handled on Web, see [Web support](/core-functionalities/web-support).
```

:::

## Normalization

> HTML can be messy. Whether users paste rich text from applications like Google Docs or Microsoft Word, or you inject external HTML via `defaultValue`, `setValue`, or pass it directly as `children` into `EnrichedText`, the markup often contains additional wrapper elements, inline styles, and structural quirks that may not match the HTML structure expected by the library..

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
HTML can be messy. Whether users paste rich text from applications like Google Docs or Microsoft Word, or you inject external HTML via `defaultValue`, `setValue`, or pass it directly as `children` into `EnrichedText`, the markup often contains additional wrapper elements, inline styles, and structural quirks that may not match the HTML structure expected by the library.
```

To handle this, both components provide a `useHtmlNormalizer` prop that normalizes incoming HTML. The normalizer cleans and restructures the input into the predictable format the library relies on (e.g., it maps `<strong>` to `<b>`, unwraps `<div>` containers into `<p>` tags, and strips unsupported tags). The `useHtmlNormalizer` prop defaults to `true`.

All supported and canonical tags are listed in [Supported tags](/fundamentals/html-format-and-supported-tags).

## Two components, one HTML format

> The library is split into an editor and a viewer:

Reviewer: Maybe this way? `viewer` sounds odd to me.
```suggestion
The library is split into an editor and a display:
```

> - **`EnrichedTextInput`** - the interactive editor from the previous page.

Reviewer: I wouldn't just refer users to the previous page. Maybe just some short descriptive sentence like:

```suggestion
- **`EnrichedTextInput`** - an interactive editor that emits HTML.
```

- **`EnrichedText`** - a read-only display component that renders the input's
  HTML.

The HTML format that both components expect is identical, what allows you to integrate them seamlessly. A common setup edits in `EnrichedTextInput`, stores the `getHTML` output, and later displays it with `EnrichedText`.

## The style state model

Not every style can be combined with every other. For example, a paragraph can't be both a heading and a list item, code blocks don't support inline formatting such as bold or italic. The editor tracks this and reports it through `onChangeState`, which gives each style three booleans:

- **`isActive`** - the style is applied at the current selection. Use it to

>   highlight a toolbar button.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **`isActive`** - whether the style is applied at the current selection. Use it to
  highlight a toolbar button.
```

- **`isBlocking`** - another active style forbids this one entirely, so toggling
  it would do nothing. For example bold is blocked inside a code block. Use it

>   to disable a button.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **`isBlocking`** - whether another active style forbids this one entirely, so toggling
  it would do nothing. For example, bold is blocked inside a code block. Use it
  to disable a toolbar button.
```

- **`isConflicting`** - this style would replace an active one if toggled on.
  For example switching a blockquote paragraph to a heading removes the

>   blockquote. Use it to hint that the toggle is a swap, not an addition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **`isConflicting`** - whether this style would replace an active one if toggled on.
  For example, switching a blockquote paragraph to a heading removes the
  blockquote. Use it to hint that the toggle is a swap, not an addition.
```

# Core concepts

You've built an editor. Before going on, it's worth understanding the few
ideas the whole library is built on. They explain why the API looks the way it
does and help you understand further chapters better.

## The input is uncontrolled

`EnrichedTextInput` does not take its content from a prop and does not push
every keystroke back into React state. It owns its content on the native side
and you talk to it through a `ref`.

This is deliberate. Rich text changes constantly — every character, selection
move and style toggle — and round-tripping all of that through JavaScript state
would be extremely slow and open to a possible de-synchronization of those states.
Keeping it native makes the editor fast and stable.

In practice this means:

- To **change** content or styling, call a method: `ref.current?.toggleBold()`,
  `ref.current?.setValue(html)`, `ref.current?.setLink(...)`.
- To **observe** content or styling, listen to an event: `onChangeState`,

>   `onChangeHtml`, `onChangeSelection`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- To **change** the content or formatting, call a method on the ref, e.g. `ref.current?.toggleBold()`, `ref.current?.setValue(html)`, or `ref.current?.setLink(...)`.
- To **observe** changes to the content or formatting, listen to events such as `onChangeState`, `onChangeHtml`, or `onChangeSelection`.
```

Maybe something like this?

You never set a `value` prop and re-render to make an edit happen.

## HTML is the source of truth

The editor's content is HTML. `setValue` and `defaultValue` seeds it with an HTML string,
`getHTML` reads the current content back, and `onChangeHtml` streams it as it
changes. What you store and what you render is a string of HTML.

The library uses a fixed set of standard and custom tags, so the output is

> predictable and portable. [Supported HTML tags](/fundamentals/html-format-and-supported-tags)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
predictable and portable. [Supported tags](/fundamentals/html-format-and-supported-tags)
```

lists exactly what it produces and accepts.

:::caution

> You own sanitization. The library doesn't guarantee safe or clean HTML, so

Reviewer 3: What does it mean that library does not guarantee clean HTML?

Author: It was worded in such way in the `WEB.md`, probably because `useHtmlNormalizer` was not enabled by default. It is now, so I believe the mention of 'cleanliness' can be removed

> You own sanitization. The library doesn't guarantee safe or clean HTML, so

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Sanitizing HTML is your responsibility. The library doesn't guarantee safe or clean HTML, so
```

It is slightly clearer for me what do you think?

sanitize anything you persist, render elsewhere, or accept from untrusted
sources.

:::

## Normalization

> HTML can be messy. If a user pastes text from Google Docs or MS Word, it can arrive packed with wrapper tags, inline styles, and structural quirks that don't match the format we expect.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
HTML can be messy. When users paste rich text from applications like Google Docs or Microsoft Word, the HTML often contains additional wrapper elements, inline styles, and structural quirks that may not match the HTML structure expected by the library.
```

I'd prefer to say that the user pastes rich text, and mention applications like Google Docs or Microsoft Word as examples. The previous wording made it sound like this only happens when pasting from Google Docs or Microsoft Word.

> HTML can be messy. If a user pastes text from Google Docs or MS Word, it can arrive packed with wrapper tags, inline styles, and structural quirks that don't match the format we expect.

Reviewer 3: One more thought: HTML can also come from `setValue` or `defaultValue`, not just from pasting rich text. I wonder if we should mention that here so it doesn't sound like this only applies to pasted content.

To handle this, both components provide a `useHtmlNormalizer` prop that normalizes incoming HTML. The normalizer cleans and restructures the input into the predictable format the library expects (e.g. it maps `<strong>` to `<b>`, unwraps `<div>` containers into `<p>` tags, and strips unsupported tags). The `useHtmlNormalizer` prop defaults to `true`.

> All supported and canonical tags are listed in [Supported HTML tags](/fundamentals/html-format-and-supported-tags).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
All supported and canonical tags are listed in [Supported tags](/fundamentals/html-format-and-supported-tags).
```

## Two components, one styling API

The library is split into an editor and a viewer:

- **`EnrichedTextInput`** — the interactive editor from the previous page.
- **`EnrichedText`** — a read-only display component that renders the input's
  HTML.

> Both accept the same `htmlStyle` prop, which describes how each tag looks

Reviewer 3: It is not 100% true because `EnrichedText` accepts also `pressColor` for links and `pressColor`, `pressBackgroundColor` for mentions

(heading sizes, blockquote borders, code block colors, and so on). Because they
share it, text looks identical whether it's being edited or displayed — no

> drift between the two. A common setup edits in `EnrichedTextInput`, stores the

Reviewer 3: > Because they share it, text looks identical whether it's being edited or displayed

But they don't have to share it, someone might style `EnrichedText` completely differently from `EnrichedTextInput`. From this description, it sounds like setting htmlStyle on one component automatically applies it to the other, which isn't the case.

`getHTML` output, and later shows it with `EnrichedText`.

## The style state model

Not every style can combine with every other. A heading isn't a list; bold
inside a code block doesn't make sense. The editor tracks this and reports it

> through `onChangeState`, which gives each style three booleans:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Not every style can be combined with every other. For example, a paragraph can't be both a heading and a list item, code blocks don't support inline formatting such as bold or italic. The editor tracks this and reports it through `onChangeState`, which gives each style three booleans:
```

What do you think of this version?

> A heading isn't a list

Bold is not italic :D

- **`isActive`** — the style is applied at the current selection. Use it to
  highlight a toolbar button.
- **`isBlocking`** — another active style forbids this one entirely, so toggling
  it would do nothing. For example bold is blocked inside a code block. Use it
  to disable a button.
- **`isConflicting`** — this style would replace an active one if toggled on.
  For example switching a blockquote paragraph to a heading removes the
  blockquote. Use it to hint that the toggle is a swap, not an addition.

Driving your toolbar from these three flags keeps the UI honest: buttons light
up and grey out according to the editor's state.

For the comprehensive list of which styles block or conflict with each other, see

> [Supported HTML tags](/fundamentals/html-format-and-supported-tags).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[Supported tags](/fundamentals/html-format-and-supported-tags).
```
